---
title: GNU make
layout: posts
tags: program_language
---

## Rule

makefile consists of `rules` with the following shape:

```makefile
target ''' : prerequisistes
           recipe
```

A `target` is usually the name of a file that is generated by a program;A target can also be the name of an action to carry out, sucn as `clean`.

A `prerequisite` is a file that is used as input to create the target. A target ifen depends on several files.

A `recipe` is an action that `make` carries out.A recipe may have more than one command,either on the same line or each on its own line. **Plaese Note:** you need to put a tab character at the begining of every recipe line! If you prefer to prefix your recipes with a character other than tab , you can set the `.RECIPEPREFIX` variable to an alternate character.

Usually a recipe is in an rule with prerequisites and serves to create a target file if any of the prerequisites change. However ,the rule that specifies a recipe for the target need not have prerequistes. For example,the rule containing the delete command associated with the target `clean` does not have prerequisites.

## Simple Makefile

```makefile
edit : main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
       insert.o search.o files.o utils.o
        cc -o edit main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
                   insert.o search.o files.o utils.o

main.o : main.c defs.h
        cc -c main.c
kbd.o : kbd.c defs.h command.h
        cc -c kbd.c
command.o : command.c defs.h command.h
        cc -c command.c
display.o : display.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c display.c
insert.o : insert.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c insert.c
search.o : search.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c search.c
files.o : files.c defs.h buffer.h command.h
        cc -c files.c
utils.o : utils.c defs.h
        cc -c utils.c
clean :
        rm edit main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
           insert.o search.o files.o utils.o
```

The target `clean` is not a file ,but merely the name if an action.Target that do not refer to files but are just action are called `phony target`.

## How make Process a Makefile

By default ,`make` starts with the first target(not targets whose names start with `.`).This is called the `default` goal.You can override this behavior using the command line or with the `.DEFAULT_GOAL` special variable.

In the previous example ,the default goal is to update the executable program `edit`;therefore we put that rule first.

## Variable

```makefile
objects = main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
          insert.o search.o files.o utils.o
```
Then,each place we want to put a list of the object file names,we can substitude the variable's value by writing `$(objects)`

```makefile
objects = main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
          insert.o search.o files.o utils.o

edit : $(objects)
        cc -o edit $(objects)
main.o : main.c defs.h
        cc -c main.c
kbd.o : kbd.c defs.h command.h
        cc -c kbd.c
command.o : command.c defs.h command.h
        cc -c command.c
display.o : display.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c display.c
insert.o : insert.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c insert.c
search.o : search.c defs.h buffer.h
        cc -c search.c
files.o : files.c defs.h buffer.h command.h
        cc -c files.c
utils.o : utils.c defs.h
        cc -c utils.c
clean :
        rm edit $(objects)
```

## Letting Make Deduce the Recipes

It is necessary to spell out the recipes for compiling the individual C source files, beacuse make can figure them out: It has an `implicit rule` for updating a `.o` file from a correspondingly named `.c` file using a `cc -c` command. For example, it will use the recipe `cc -c main.c -o main.o` to compile `main.c` into `main.o`

```makefile
objects = main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
          insert.o search.o files.o utils.o

edit : $(objects)
        cc -o edit $(objects)

main.o : defs.h
kbd.o : defs.h command.h
command.o : defs.h command.h
display.o : defs.h buffer.h
insert.o : defs.h buffer.h
search.o : defs.h buffer.h
files.o : defs.h buffer.h command.h
utils.o : defs.h

.PHONY : clean
clean :
        rm edit $(objects)
```

## Another Style of Makefile

When the objects of a makefile are created only by implicit rules,an alternative style of makefiles is possible.In this style of makefile, you group entries by theri prerequisites instead of by their targets, Here is what one looks like.

```makefile
objects = main.o kbd.o command.o display.o \
          insert.o search.o files.o utils.o

edit : $(objects)
        cc -o edit $(objects)

$(objects) : defs.h
kbd.o command.o files.o : command.h
display.o insert.o search.o files.o : buffer.h
```

Here `defs.h` is given as a prerequisite of all the object files;`command.h` and `buffer.h` are prerequisites of the specific object files listed for them.

## Rules for Cleaning the Directory

Compiling a program is not the only thing you might want to write rules for. Makefiles commonly tell how to do a few other things besides compiling a program: for example, how to delete all the object files and executables so that the directory is `clean`.

```makefile
clean:
        rm edit $(objects)
```

In practice we might want to write the rule in a somewhat more complicated manner to handle unanticipated situations.

```makefile
.PHONY : clean
clean :
        -rm edit $(objects)
```

This prevents `make` from getting confused by an actual file called `clean` and causes it to continue in spite of errors from `rm`.


## What Makefiles Contain

Makefiles contain five kinds of things :`explicit rules`,`implicit rules`,`variable definitions`,`directives` and `comments`

* An `explicit rule` says when and how to remake one or more files,called the rule's `targets`. It lists the other files that the targets depend on, called the prerequisites of the target, and may also give a recipe to use to create or update the targets.
* An `implicit rule` says when and how to remake a class of files based on their names.It describe how a target may depend on a file with a name similar to the target and gives a recipe to create or uodate such a target.
* A `variable definition` is a line that specifies a text string value for a variable that can be substituted into the text later.
* A `directive` is an instruction for `make` to do something special while reading the makefile. This include:
    * Reading another makefile
    * Deciding whether to use or ignore a part of the makefile
    * Defining a variable from a verbation string containing multiple lines
* `#` in a line of a makefile starts a `comment`.It and the rest of the line are ignored,except that a trailing backslash not escaped by another backslash will continue the comment across multiple lines.